Add whats new for driver authors in 0.42.0 (#19820)
metabase/metabase: docs/developers-guide/driver-changelog.md

# Driver Interface Changelog

> Howdy! 👋
> 
> Below is a list of changes to our driver interface for driver authors in each major version of Metabase.
> 
> Generally, when we deprecate things, we'll list them here and wait three major versions before removing them entirely.
> 
> ## What's new for driver authors in Metabase 0.42.0

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Changes in Metabase 0.42.0 almost exclusively only affect drivers that derive from `:sql` (including `:sql-jdbc`).
> Non-SQL drivers likely will require no changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Changes in Metabase 0.42.0 affect drivers that derive from `:sql` (including `:sql-jdbc`).
Non-SQL drivers likely will require no changes.
```

0.42.0 introduces several significant changes to the way the SQL query processor compiles and determines aliases for
MBQL `:field` clauses. For more background, see pull request
[#19384](https://github.com/metabase/metabase/pull/19384).

> For the most part, SQL drivers don't need to make any changes unless they were doing manipulating Field or Table
> aliases. For drivers that were doing these things, lots of overlapping vars and methods have been consolidated, which
> means the bulk of the changes you'll need to make is simply deleting deprecated method implementations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you were manipulating Field or Table aliases, we consolidated a lot of overlapping vars and methods, which means you may need to delete deprecated method implementations.
```

> #### Significant changes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Significant changes
```

- The `metabase.driver.sql.query-processor/->honeysql` method for Field instances, e.g.

  ```clj
  (defmethod sql.qp/->honeysql [:my-driver (class Field)]
    [driver field]
    ...)
  ```

  is no longer invoked. All compilation is now handled by the MBQL `:field` clause method, e.g.

  ```clj
  (defmethod sql.qp/->honeysql [:my-driver :field]
    [driver field-clause]
    ...)
  ```

  If you were doing something special here, you'll need to move that special login into `[<driver> :field]` instead.
  (You may no longer need this special logic, however -- see below.)

- `:field`, `:expression`, and `:aggregation-options` clauses now contain information about what aliases you should
  use to refer to them on both the left-hand side and right-hand side of SQL `AS` or elsewhere in a query. See PR
  [#19610](https://github.com/metabase/metabase/pull/19610) for a detailed discussion about the new information,
  hereafter referred to as the /[#19610 information](https://github.com/metabase/metabase/pull/19610)/.

> - `->honeysql` methods, specifically implementations for `:field`, should use or replace the
>   [#19610 information](https://github.com/metabase/metabase/pull/19610) rather than attempting to determine or
>   override it in some other fashion. If your driver does not have a custom implementation of `->honeysql` for `:field`
>   or `(class Field)`, you don't need to worry about this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If you have a custom implementation of `->honeysql` for `:field` or `(class Field)`: `->honeysql` methods for `:field` should use or replace the
  [#19610 information](https://github.com/metabase/metabase/pull/19610) rather than attempting to determine or
  override it in some other fashion.
```

> #### New methods

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### New methods
```

- `metabase.driver/escape-alias` (moved from `metabase.driver.sql.query-processor/escape-alias`, which was introduced
  in 0.41.0) is now used to generate the [#19610 information](https://github.com/metabase/metabase/pull/19610) and
  used consistently across the SQL QP code. If you need to transform generated Field aliases for any reason (such as
  escaping disallowed characters), implement this method.

> #### Deprecated methods and vars

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Deprecated methods and vars
```

The following methods and vars are slated for removal in Metabase 0.45.0 unless otherwise noted.

- `metabase.driver/format-custom-field-name` is now unused. Implement `metabase.driver/escape-alias` instead.

> - `metabase.driver.sql.query-processor/escape-alias` has been renamed to `metabase.driver/escape-alias`. Everything
>   else is the same. Implementations of the old method will continue to work for now, but please update your drivers to
>   implement the new method since it will be removed in a future release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `metabase.driver.sql.query-processor/escape-alias` has been renamed to `metabase.driver/escape-alias`. Everything
  else is the same.
```

- `metabase.driver.sql.query-processor/field-clause->alias` no longer uses the optional parameter `unique-name-fn`.
  Aliases are now made unique automatically, after escaping them; implement `metabase.driver/escape-alias` if you need
  to do something special before they are made unique. (Unique aliases are also escaped a second time if you need to
  do something /really/ special.)

> - `metabase.driver.sql.query-processor/field->alias`, which was deprecated in 0.41.0, is now unused in 0.42.0.
>   Implementing this method no longer has any effect. Implement `metabase.driver/escape-alias` instead if you need to
>   do something special; use the [#19610 information](https://github.com/metabase/metabase/pull/19610) if you the alias
>   for one reason or another. This method is still slated for removal in Metabase 0.44.0.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `metabase.driver.sql.query-processor/field->alias`, which was deprecated in 0.41.0, is now unused in 0.42.0.
  Implementing this method no longer has any effect. Implement `metabase.driver/escape-alias` instead if you need to
  do something special; use the [#19610 information](https://github.com/metabase/metabase/pull/19610) if you need to escape the alias
  for one reason or another. This method is still slated for removal in Metabase 0.44.0.
```

"If you the alias for one reason or another? I'm guessing "escape"?

> - `metabase.driver.sql.query-processor/*field-options*` is now unused and is no longer bound automatically. Create
>   your own version if you need it for some reason. See our SQL Server driver for an example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `metabase.driver.sql.query-processor/*field-options*` is now unused and is no longer bound automatically.  If you need field options for some reason, see our SQL Server driver for an example on how to create it.
```

- `metabase.driver.sql.query-processor/*table-alias*` is now unused and is no longer bound automatically. Use or
  override `:metabase.query-processor.util.add-alias-info/source-table` from the [#19610
  information](https://github.com/metabase/metabase/pull/19610) instead.

> - `metabase.driver.sql.query-processor/*source-query*` is now unused and is no longer bound automatically. Use
>   `metabase.driver.sql.query-processor/*inner-query*` instead, which is always bound even if we are not inside of a
>   source query.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `metabase.driver.sql.query-processor/*source-query*` is now unused and is no longer bound automatically. Use
  `metabase.driver.sql.query-processor/*inner-query*` instead, which is always bound, even if we aren't inside of a
  source query.
```

- `metabase.driver.sql.query-processor/field->identifier` is now unused. Implementing this method should no longer be
  necessary under any circumstances. Override `->honeysql` for `[<driver> :field]` and manipulate the [#19610
  information](https://github.com/metabase/metabase/pull/19610) if you need to do something special here.

> - `metabase.driver.sql.query-processor/prefix-field-alias` is no longer used. Previously, it was made available to
>   give drivers a change to escape automatically generated aliases for joined Fields. This is no longer necessary,
>   because `metabase.driver/escape-alias` is called on automatically generated aliases. Implement
>   `metabase.driver/escape-alias` if you need to do something special.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `metabase.driver.sql.query-processor/prefix-field-alias` is no longer used. Previously, it was made available to
  give drivers a chance to escape automatically generated aliases for joined Fields. This is no longer necessary,
  because `metabase.driver/escape-alias` is called on automatically generates aliases. Implement
  `metabase.driver/escape-alias` if you need to do something special.
```
